Become a member
Sign in
Get started
Responses (1)

What are your thoughts?
Cancel
Respond
CARTOON WORLD
CARTOON WORLD
4 months ago

There is a problem with the source code.
Under compiling it shows an error”stray/342 in program”something like that.

Alcohol Detection using Arduino with Motor Locking.
Lavish Lodha
Lavish Lodha
Follow
Nov 12, 2019 · 4 min read



It is not uncommon to pick up the newspaper and read about a road accident. In fact, India holds the world record in the number of road accidents annually, according to a report released by the WHO in 2010. Around 1,34,000 people die every year in India on account of road accidents. The most shocking fact is that 70% of these are due to the consumption of alcohol, according to a report released in 2011.
In this project, we will go over how to build an alcohol sensor with an arduino. The alcohol sensor we will use is the MQ-3 sensor. This is a sensor that is not only sensitive to alcohol, particularly ethanol, which is the type of alcohol which is found in wine, beer, and liquor.
This type of sensor circuit can be used as a breathalyzer to check a person’s blood alcohol level. Just as we exhale carbon dioxide when we breathe out, we also will breathe out some alcohol if we have alcohol in our blood. Any alcometer device can measure this alcohol content.The more ethanol in your blood, the more there is in the air on exhalation. This alcohol content gives a good indication for if a person is drunk and how drunk they are.
Hardware Details:
Image for post
Table for Hardware Requirement
MQ3 Sensor:
Image for post
MQ-3 Sensor
MQ3 alcohol gas sensor is made by using SnO2 material which has less conductivity in clean air. Whenever it comes nearby alcohol gas its starts conducting highly according to the gas concentration. So user can sense the difference of output voltage using any microcontroller and can detect the presence of Alcohol. This is low cost and a suitable sensor for many applications for alcohol detection. This sensor has a long life and good sensitivity. Some of the applications that can be made by using this sensor are Alcohol gas alarm, portable alcohol detector, gas alarms, Breathalyzer etc.
Procedure:
Install Arduino software in your system.
Make your code and save it as .ino file and compile it successfully.
After making all connections in the circuit, we will connect the Arduino using USB cable to our system.
We will then upload the code and will print the required results in serial window.
Source Code:
const int ledPin=13;
int enA = 9;
int in1 = 8;
int in2 = 7;
int flag=0;
const int threshold=400;
void setup() {
// put your setup code here, to run once:
Serial.begin(9600);
pinMode(A0,INPUT);
pinMode(ledPin,OUTPUT);
pinMode(enA, OUTPUT);
pinMode(in1, OUTPUT);
pinMode(in2, OUTPUT);
}
void loop() {
// put your main code here, to run repeatedly:
int a=analogRead(A0);
Serial.println(a);
delay(500);
if(a>threshold)
{
tone(12,1600);
delay(1000);
for (int i = 255; i >= 0; — i)
{
analogWrite(enA, i);
delay(20);
}
digitalWrite(in1, LOW);
digitalWrite(in2, LOW);
flag=1;
}
else
{
if(flag==0)
{
digitalWrite(ledPin,0);
digitalWrite(in1, HIGH);
digitalWrite(in2, LOW);
for (int i = 0; i < 256; i++)
{
analogWrite(enA, i);
delay(20);
}
delay(1000);
}
noTone(12);
}
}
Explanation:
The MQ3 alcohol sensor detects the alcohol and outputs the value through A0 pin of the Arduino. (printing the value to keep a note of it)
The L293D IC helps in controlling the DC motor and requires 9V input voltage.
The enable and direction pin are being controlled by pin 9, pin 8 and pin 7 of the Arduino.
Pin 8 and 7 will drive when they have different voltage level. Initially, we set pin 8 as HIGH and pin 7 as LOW. When both are LOW, the DC motor stops.
Whenever the sensor detects alcohol above given threshold and the pin 8 and pin 7 are both set to LOW and hence DC motor stops.
Eventually, we will generate sound through piezo buzzer by making use of pin 12 and passing a wave using tone()function.
Circuit Diagram:
Image for post
Images
Image for post
Complete Working Circuit
50

1
Arduino
50 claps

1 response



Lavish Lodha
WRITTEN BY

Lavish Lodha
Follow
More From Medium
Automatic Reporting in Python — Part 1: From Planning to Hello World
Joshua Goyder

Kotlin Demystified: The power of `when`
Nicole Borrelli in Android Developers

Beginning Python Programming — Part 6
Bob Roebling in Better Programming

Formatting Bootstrap Grids with 13+ Columns
Josh Sarna

Why You Should Learn Python For Your First Programming Language
Austin Howard Tech

Dashboards in Python for Beginners and Everyone Else using Dash
Eric Kleppen in The Startup

The Making of a Smart Doorbell
Gabriel Aboy

The proper way to make API calls in Flutter
Solidmvp story in Solidmvp Africa

Discover Medium
Welcome to a place where words matter. On Medium, smart voices and original ideas take center stage - with no ads in sight. Watch
Make Medium yours
Follow all the topics you care about, and we’ll deliver the best stories for you to your homepage and inbox. Explore
Become a member
Get unlimited access to the best stories on Medium — and support writers while you’re at it. Just $5/month. Upgrade
About
Help
Legal
We’ve made changes to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. They take effect on September 1, 2020, and we encourage you to review them. By continuing to use our services, you agree to the new Terms of Service and acknowledge the Privacy Policy applies to you.
Continue